MIGRATION_STATUS.md, before:

# Migration Status Update: PHPSimpl Modernization

## ✅ Completed Milestones

### 1. Multi-Environment Testing Infrastructure
Established a robust testing environment that simulates both the current production state and the future modern state:
- **PHP 5.5 Environment (Baseline):** Fully functional using Docker, simulating the legacy production environment. Used to verify backward compatibility.
- **PHP 8.2 Environment (Target):** Fully functional using Docker, simulating the modern target environment. Used to verify forward compatibility and catch deprecations.
- **Test Application:** A "smoke test" application (`test-app/`) is running in both environments, providing visual confirmation of database connectivity and core framework features.

### 2. Database Layer Migration (`mysql_*` to `mysqli_*`)
Successfully migrated the core `lib/db.php` class from the deprecated `mysql_*` functions to the modern `mysqli_*` extension.
- **Backward Compatibility Preserved:** The updated code continues to work perfectly on PHP 5.5 (as `mysqli` has been available since PHP 5.0).
- **Forward Compatibility Achieved:** The updated code now runs on PHP 8.2 without errors, resolving the critical "undefined function mysql_connect" fatal error.
- **Verification:**
  - Validated on PHP 5.5: ✅ Connection successful, queries working.
  - Validated on PHP 8.2: ✅ Connection successful, queries working.

### 3. Test Suite & Bug Discovery
Established a PEST test suite and achieved **46 passing tests**. During this process, identified and **FIXED** several pre-existing bugs in the framework:
- **[FIXED] Form Class Bug:** The `Form` class constructor in `lib/form.php` fails to pass a `Validate` instance to the `Field` constructor.
- **[FIXED] Validate Class Bug:** The phone number regex in `lib/validate.php` is missing a closing delimiter.
- **[FIXED] Functions Bug:** The `a()` helper function in `lib/functions.php` has reversed arguments (`$index[$array]` vs `$array[$index]`).
- **[FIXED] Form Notice Bug:** `Form` constructor threw notices when optional arrays (`$required`, `$labels`) were missing keys. Isset check added.

All tests for these components are now enabled and passing.

---

## 📋 Next Steps (Recommended)

### Immediate Fixes (Framework Bugs)
Now that we have a stable base, we should fix the bugs identified by the test suite:
1.  **Fix Form Class:** Update `lib/form.php` to correctly instantiate `Field` objects with a `Validate` dependency.
2.  **Fix Validation:** Correct the phone regex in `lib/validate.php`.
3.  **Fix Helper Functions:** Correct the `a()` function logic in `lib/functions.php`.

### Expansion
1.  **Add `Session` Tests:** The `Session` class is currently untested and likely contains similar legacy issues.
2.  **Add `File/Upload` Tests:** Ensure file uploading works in the Docker environments.
3.  **CI/CD Pipeline:** Create a GitHub Actions workflow to automatically run these tests (using the scripts we created) on every push.

## 🛠️ Developer Usage via Docker

**Run Tests:**
```bash
./serve-php55.sh  # Test on PHP 5.5 (http://localhost:8055)
./serve-php82.sh  # Test on PHP 8.2 (http://localhost:8082)
```

**Run Automated Suite:**
```bash
./vendor/bin/pest
```

Commit message:

feat: Add Session and File/Upload tests and modern CI workflow
- Add Unit tests for `Simpl\Session` using Mockery for DB interaction
- Add Unit tests for `Simpl\File` using temporary filesystem isolation
- Add .github/workflows/ci.yml for automated testing on PHP 8.2
- Update `Simpl\File` and `Simpl\Folder` to use `__construct` for PHP 8 compatibility (replaces deprecated PHP 4 style constructors)
- Fix `Simpl\File::Delete()` signature compatibility with `Simpl\Folder::Delete()`
- Update composer.lock to resolve dependencies for PHP 8.2 environment

MIGRATION_STATUS.md, after:

# Migration Status Update: PHPSimpl Modernization

## ✅ Completed Milestones

### 1. Multi-Environment Testing Infrastructure
Established a robust testing environment that simulates both the current production state and the future modern state:
- **PHP 5.5 Environment (Baseline):** Fully functional using Docker, simulating the legacy production environment. Used to verify backward compatibility.
- **PHP 8.2 Environment (Target):** Fully functional using Docker, simulating the modern target environment. Used to verify forward compatibility and catch deprecations.
- **Test Application:** A "smoke test" application (`test-app/`) is running in both environments, providing visual confirmation of database connectivity and core framework features.

### 2. Database Layer Migration (`mysql_*` to `mysqli_*`)
Successfully migrated the core `lib/db.php` class from the deprecated `mysql_*` functions to the modern `mysqli_*` extension.
- **Backward Compatibility Preserved:** The updated code continues to work perfectly on PHP 5.5 (as `mysqli` has been available since PHP 5.0).
- **Forward Compatibility Achieved:** The updated code now runs on PHP 8.2 without errors, resolving the critical "undefined function mysql_connect" fatal error.
- **Verification:**
  - Validated on PHP 5.5: ✅ Connection successful, queries working.
  - Validated on PHP 8.2: ✅ Connection successful, queries working.

### 3. Test Suite & Bug Discovery
Established a PEST test suite and achieved **46 passing tests**. During this process, identified and **FIXED** several pre-existing bugs in the framework:
- **[FIXED] Form Class Bug:** The `Form` class constructor in `lib/form.php` fails to pass a `Validate` instance to the `Field` constructor.
- **[FIXED] Validate Class Bug:** The phone number regex in `lib/validate.php` is missing a closing delimiter.
- **[FIXED] Functions Bug:** The `a()` helper function in `lib/functions.php` has reversed arguments (`$index[$array]` vs `$array[$index]`).
- **[FIXED] Form Notice Bug:** `Form` constructor threw notices when optional arrays (`$required`, `$labels`) were missing keys. Isset check added.

All tests for these components are now enabled and passing.

---

## 📋 Next Steps (Recommended)

### Immediate Fixes (Framework Bugs)
Now that we have a stable base, we should fix the bugs identified by the test suite:
1.  **Fix Form Class:** Update `lib/form.php` to correctly instantiate `Field` objects with a `Validate` dependency.
2.  **Fix Validation:** Correct the phone regex in `lib/validate.php`.
3.  **Fix Helper Functions:** Correct the `a()` function logic in `lib/functions.php`.

### 4. Test Expansion & Modernization
Expanded the test suite to cover remaining core components on PHP 8.2:
- **Session Tests:** Added unit tests for `Simpl\Session` using Mockery to simulate database interactions.
- **File Tests:** Added unit tests for `Simpl\File`, covering filesystem operations safely.
- **CI/CD:** Added GitHub Actions workflow (`.github/workflows/ci.yml`) to verify tests on every push.
- **[FIXED] PHP 8 Compatibility:** Identified and fixed PHP 4-style constructors in `File` and `Folder` classes which are deprecated/removed in PHP 8.
- **[FIXED] Strict Typing:** Fixed `File::Delete()` signature to match parent `Folder::Delete()` to satisfy PHP strict inheritance rules.

## 🛠️ Developer Usage via Docker

**Run Tests:**
```bash
./serve-php55.sh  # Test on PHP 5.5 (http://localhost:8055)
./serve-php82.sh  # Test on PHP 8.2 (http://localhost:8082)
```

**Run Automated Suite:**
```bash
./vendor/bin/pest
```
